added release notes (#872)
FirelyTeam/firely-docs-firely-server: releasenotes/releasenotes_v6.rst

        
        docker pull firely/server:latest

.. _vonk_releasenotes_6_9_1:

Release 6.9.1, July 28th, 2026
-------------------------------

Improvements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

> #. Chained and reverse-chained (``_has``) searches on SQL Server now use a more efficient query plan for large, non-selective chains with no change in search results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Chained and reverse-chained (``_has``) searches on SQL Server are now faster for large, non-selective chains. The database uses a more efficient query plan for these searches, with no change in search results.
```

> #. MongoDB: reverse-chained (``_has``) searches (e.g. ``Patient?_has:Coverage:beneficiary:identifier=...``) no longer scale with the number of resources of the searched type. Performance is now independent of the searched population size, matching how forward-chained searches already behave. The ``MongoDbOptions:ChainingThreshold`` setting now also applies to ``_has`` sub-queries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Reverse-chained (``_has``) searches on MongoDB (e.g. ``Patient?_has:Coverage:beneficiary:identifier=...``) are now significantly faster on large databases. Their performance no longer depends on the number of resources of the searched type, matching how forward chained searches already behave. The ``MongoDbOptions:ChainingThreshold`` setting now also applies to ``_has`` sub-queries.
```

Features
^^^^^^^^

#. Added the ``SmartAuthorizationOptions:AllowHistory`` setting (default ``false``). When enabled, ``_history`` requests, ``vread``, and version-level custom operations are no longer rejected under SMART authorization; access is evaluated against the *current* version of the resource, since historical versions are not separately indexed. The default behavior is unchanged — history access remains forbidden under SMART authorization unless this setting is enabled — and the server log now mentions the setting by name whenever such a request is rejected.

> #. When ``AllowHistory`` is enabled, access to historical versions of a **deleted** resource is restricted to callers whose authorization covers the resource type as a whole (e.g. a scope like ``user/*.read``); callers who are only authorized for specific resource instances cannot retrieve historical content of a resource they never had a claim to, since a deleted resource's current version is a tombstone with no compartment or scope information to check against. Requesting the deleted version itself still correctly reports HTTP 410 Gone. Paging parameters (``_count``, ``_since``, ``_at``, ``_sort``, ``_skip``, ``_total``) are fully honored on authorized ``_history`` requests; a single request returns at most ``BundleOptions:MaxCount`` resources, with a warning logged if more would match.

Reviewer 2: In my test, `_at` is not supported, all others are fine. (I didn't try `_total`, but I think it should be fine)

When using `_at`, I get following OO
`{
        "resourceType": "OperationOutcome",
        "issue": [
          {
            "severity": "warning",
            "code": "not-supported",
            "details": {
              "coding": [
                {
                  "system": "http://hl7.org/fhir/dotnet-api-operation-outcome",
                  "code": "5003"
                }
              ],
              "text": "Argument _at is not implemented"
            },
            "diagnostics": "_at=2020-01-01T00:00:00Z"
          }
        ]
      }`

Author: Good catch! I will remove it!

#. FSI: added a ``--sourceFilter`` option for the filesystem source, to only import files whose name matches a given wildcard pattern (e.g. ``*.ndjson`` or ``patients_??.ndjson``) from the source directory and its subdirectories. When not set, all files are imported as before. The pattern must be a file name pattern (no directory separators), and is validated at startup.

> #. Validation: Introduced the setting ``Validation:FixInvalidPrimitiveTypes`` (default ``true``). When enabled, invalid primitive types are fixed to the correct type where possible. When disabled, invalid primitive types are always returned as an error. This setting was introduced to prevent breaking existing workflows that rely on permissive parsing of invalid primitive types, but as it can increase load on the server, it is recommended to set it to ``false`` in in order to avoid unnecessary overhead when processing large amounts of data. See :ref:`_feature_fix_invalid_primitive_types` for more information.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#. Validation: Introduced the setting ``Validation:FixInvalidPrimitiveTypes`` (default ``true``). When enabled, invalid primitive types are fixed to the correct type where possible. When disabled, invalid primitive types are always returned as an error. This setting was introduced to prevent breaking existing workflows that rely on permissive parsing of invalid primitive types, but as it can increase load on the server, it is recommended to set it to ``false`` in order to avoid unnecessary overhead when processing large amounts of data. See :ref:`_feature_fix_invalid_primitive_types` for more information.
```
